Hey, Brian. How's it going?
It's excellent.
Awesome. Hello, YouTube. Thank you, everyone, for being here to watch the video. If you're not
already, please subscribe and crush that bell for us so you can always catch the live recordings.
And with that, are you about ready to do the very first show of the year?
Sure. It's the first show of 2026.
Hello, and welcome to Python Bytes, where we deliver Python news and headlines
directly to your earbuds.
This is episode 464,
recorded January 5th,
2026.
Brian, it's 2026.
Amazing.
It is amazing.
I'm Michael Kennedy.
That's Brian Okken.
And we're here to bring you
another year of awesome Python news.
And we've got a bunch of good ones
queued up here.
I've got a pretty interesting spy story
to tell people, Brian.
It's going to be very fun.
Cool.
Yes.
If you're listening and you're not subscribed to the newsletter, you definitely should.
It's super high quality.
We put a lot of extra details, extra information, not just an emailing version of the show notes.
Follow us on the socials.
You'll find them probably in the newsletter.
I believe they're right there at the top, but also in the show notes.
And yeah, with that, Brian, how would you like to kick things off for the new year?
Let's kick it off with a new tool.
So switch to, what are we doing?
Let's go with this view.
Anyway, Ty, I think I'm pronouncing it Ty.
I don't know how it's supposed to be.
I've asked Charlie Marsh, it's Ty.
No, wait.
No, it's T-Y.
T-Y.
It's T-Y.
Okay.
I believe because it's uv, T-Y.
So now I'm starting to doubt myself.
But when I interviewed him about T-Y, I asked, I'm pretty sure it's T-Y.
Oh, that makes sense.
uv and ty okay ty uh okay um it's an extreme it says it is an extremely fast python type checker
and lsp which is what a language server protocol like i don't know what lsp stands for do you
language server protocol uh yeah lsp something yep anyway um it's okay so ty's been out for a while
But the news as of December 16th is that it's in beta.
People have been playing with it for a while anyway.
But I thought, so we're going to link to the Charlie Marshall's announcement of it.
But, and this was going to actually, to be clear, this was going to be an extra.
But I was playing with it this weekend and I'm kind of in love.
I really like ty.
really fast type checker and language server.
And luckily, this is not one where it's so fast that you say,
did it actually run?
Because it actually prints something out.
When you run like tie check, it'll say, yeah.
Even if it doesn't find anything, it says like all done or everything.
So thank you.
Thank you to you, Astral, to actually letting us know that it's finished.
But it is super fast.
So type checking, I've used mypy before.
I think that's pronounced mypy.
And PyRite, I tried that, and PyLance.
So actually, I don't remember.
PyLance has been a while, but I have tried PyRite and mypy
because people have submitted issues with some of my projects to say,
hey, these throw problems with mypy.
Can we fix this?
So we've had some fixes on like pytestCheck has been one project that we've made some changes.
However, okay, so installed ty just the other day.
And yes, it is super fast.
I didn't, I'm using, expecting, they have a graph that shows, oh, what are they typing?
Oh, they checked home assistant project.
which is a pretty big project and um my pie takes 45 seconds to run and ty takes two seconds and uh
i didn't have anything that large it just ran instantly and spit out a ton of stuff so i tried
actually went back and tried a couple other projects um so here's another project uh
running it let's see in the torch project oh oh recompute i'm getting ahead of myself
so it's really fast but that's not the coolest part the coolest part is it's really fast just
the first time and then it's even faster when you run it again because uh they're doing um
they're doing regenerative stuff so when you um after what did they write down um it's designed
from the ground up to be incremental, to have incrementality. I don't think that's a word,
guys, but to incrementally just check the things you changed to make it faster. And the reason why
is to try to get it running within your editor as well. So yeah, so it's pretty fun. I actually
ran it so like i said i ran it on some small projects and it um a couple things i'm like why
is it bugging me about this but i just tried to fix the suggestions and i found that actually it
was making easier to read code even though i didn't some of the things i didn't quite get
like here's one that tripped me up so if you uh if you declare if you've got a function with uh
input parameter and you declare the input type. I always think of that as like the input type I
expect the user to call this function with. But once I'm in the function, I can change the type.
If it came in as a list of strings and I wanted to turn it into just a concatenated full string,
that was actually the example I had. And it said, yeah, that's the wrong type. You said list of
strings, but then you assigned it a string. And I'm like, well, okay, could I, if it, would it be
more clear if I add a new variable and I actually just tried to clean it up and I'm like, yeah,
this is easier to read actually. It'll be better to maintain. So I'm trying to embrace the error
messages as something that might make it easier to read even and not become combative. But I tried
installing, there's an extension that they released also to the ty extension for VS Code.
And this does a ton of stuff.
Inlay type hints, go to definition information.
I'm pointing this out because I know people will try it out.
But be sure to read the documentation because there's a warning in there to say it's a language server also.
So you need to either turn off the default language server or turn off TY's language server.
Having two at the same time don't work great.
So I'm super happy with the project so far.
But yeah.
That's cool.
I definitely want to give the extension a try.
I've been using PyRite as well.
And it's also, sorry, PowerFly.
All the pies.
PowerFly.
And it has the same deal.
You've got to go disable a bunch of stuff in the Visual Studio editors.
And, you know, like Cursor and others.
And it's annoying that you've got to do it.
I feel like that is a fault of Visual Studio code.
Why would it let you run two language servers for the same language?
That should be like, which one do you want to use?
Just tell me, right?
I detected that two are running.
It's kind of the nature of Visual Studio being just composed
out of a bunch of disjointed things, right?
But once you get it set up, it's super nice.
I totally agree.
One thing I wanted to bring up that I haven't yet also is
when I ran it on pytestCheck,
it ran, it like,
and actually I've known that the pytestCheck
is kind of a fun plugin, but it
has some, like,
I'm hacking Python with this. I'm like
overloading a bunch of stuff
and a package that's also
a context manager
and stuff like that.
I do plan on, like,
it's noting a whole bunch of errors, and I do
want to fix all those that just have a lot of other
stuff going on.
And so I'm not like a really, I didn't intend for this to be an apology.
What I'm meaning is when I go to check these, ty has a whole bunch of settings.
You can turn off any check.
So that's what I think I'll do.
I'll probably like any of them that are failing, I'll probably turn them off and then fix them one at a time and go through.
And I like that they just said, you know what?
People might want to turn any of these off.
So we'll just give you access to all of them.
Yeah, that's very cool.
I'd like to throw out one more thing about the fast.
Like, well, my editor is fast enough.
I don't really care.
Or what's it matter if it takes 20 seconds for PyRite to run?
One of the things that you can do with these
that I don't think a lot of people are doing,
but you can tell, you can set up rules
and tell your agentic coding tools,
like whenever you make a change,
please run ty or PyRly or whatever against my code base
and verify that you haven't made any typing mistakes.
Everything's hanging together, right?
And those tools will do that like over and over,
and it can just make it super slow, right?
So if you're not sitting there waiting for the thing to run and run,
you know, just reanalyze, reanalyze,
just tell it to use ty and it'll just be nearly instant.
Nope, it's fine.
Oh, I got to fix something, right?
So one more use case here.
Yeah, and like we said, since it's incremental,
it'll be like milliseconds to rerun it.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
Super cool.
All right.
I have a scary story for you, Brian.
Okay.
So I want to talk about a pair of articles I wrote,
and I think they're very constructive,
very helpful for people to use.
So increasingly in open source,
we're dealing with issues around supply chain problems, right?
This first surfaced most prominently with typosquatting,
and I'm sure people have heard of that word by now,
but it's like Django without the J or whatever.
And if people don't really know and they type, you know,
pip install dango or whatever,
it might go and find nothing.
and say that's there, or it might find something that someone put up there to look like Django,
but also bring down some kind of malicious badness, right? And that's a problem. You can fix it by
being careful. The PyPI folks are doing a lot of work to fight that and to like preserve misspellings
of common, common things, but it's still, it's an issue, right? I mean, it's gone so far that
There are people trying to see what agent encoding LLMs would recommend
because sometimes they would make up package names
and then they would go put stuff there.
So the next time it recommends that non-existing thing,
it actually exists as a virus.
So you've got to be careful.
But way more serious than that is there were some announcements
that some folks had been phished who worked on some project
and their PyPI credentials were hacked
and their projects were replaced with lookalike projects,
but that also had bad things in it, right?
And that's way worse.
So if I use some library, and it uses a library,
which itself uses a less-known library way down the chain,
and that third level gets hacked,
and I pip install the new version of my library, I'm toast, right?
And it's not because I misspelled something.
nobody misspelled anything. It's because somewhere along the way, somebody's computer got taken over
in some way. Off it goes. This is bad. So I thought I was thinking about this over winter break. I'm
like, well, what can we do about it? So I wrote two articles with concrete advice. First one,
Python supply chain made easy. Right? And what are you going to do? I gave out some examples.
So here's the thing. We have this tool called PipAudit. PipAudit is cool. It audits Python
environments. It's officially part of the PyPA. It's under their GitHub organization, even though
it's Trellabits and Google have also had influence on it. It audits Python environments, requirement
files, and dependency trees for known security vulnerabilities, and it can even fix them. I don't
care about fixing them because it may be too late. I just want that to not happen. So what I was
thinking is like, well, how do we use that tool?
And how do we use UV?
So one thing you can do is with pipaudit
is you can just say this virtual environment,
everything installed in here, how's it looking?
Is it bad or is it not bad, right?
And you can just uv tool install it
because it doesn't have to be installed
in your local environment, not necessarily, right?
You just have that active when you run it.
So that's pretty cool.
But what if people don't run it?
You know, like this is always the problem is like,
I set up this thing, this way to lint code or format it
to make sure we always do it right.
But then there's those people that just don't run it, right?
So one thing you can do this nice is I created a unit test,
pytest test, which will run pip audit
on wherever pytest is running.
So like your application that's being tested,
it will also run pipaudit against that.
So that's cool.
It just does a sub process,
figures out which version of Python it is,
and then it just runs pipaudit.
For this to work,
you've got to actually have it installed
as part of the virtual environment,
but that's all good, right?
So then it will just look at all the stuff you've got installed,
and your tests will fail,
which means your CI will fail
if some kind of vulnerable thing gets in there.
That's pretty cool.
yeah pretty nice so people can just grab this test and drop it in and there's
really not much to it and you run it it's cool also you could I mean you could
set it up as a git commit hook but it's a little bit slow so next thing you can
do is very often something like this will happen a couple days later people
are like why is my CPU at 100% and why is it this project I'm working on you
know that it'll get discovered right and these things get yanked pretty quickly
that's kind of the positive side is they don't typically last so the other thing
you can do was with uv as you can say uv pip compile or or uv sink - - upgrade I
think is the command for the uv lock file version but regardless you can
always pass a exclude newer than just dash, dash, exclude, dash newer some timeframe.
So I chose one week. And what that means is if when I say update my requirements in the pinned
lock file, it will basically pretend anything released in the last week doesn't exist and only
update them to a week ago. That way, because the problem is pip audit can know that there's a bad
one, but if it was released 10 minutes ago, pip audit, no one's going to have reported it and
formalized it, right? There's this window in the really early days of a package being updated that
no one's going to catch it and get it into the ecosystem in time, right? And so just having a
little bit of time like let let other people try this project for a week if if no one freaks out
and says oh my gosh it's taking over the world it's more likely to be okay right yeah sure i mean
look it's not a complete defense it's not like well if it's a week or older it's never going to
be a problem but almost all of these that are big problems are discovered within a week or you know
put a month whatever you put a year like whatever you feel is like enough that it's very unlikely
you're going to get tied up in it, right?
We can put whatever number you want.
But the point is you can put a delay.
So whenever you say update my dependencies,
it says, but not the very, very, very new ones.
And I've been doing that for a while
and it's been fine.
For a while, I mean like a week and a half.
But I thought, okay, well, what about,
this is all well and good if you have CI,
but what about production?
What if you're doing like DevOps with Docker or stuff?
Also, if you run your pip audit
and it tells you that you have a virus you've pip installed into your dev machine too late
once you've installed a virus like it could have downloaded stuff off the internet it could put
rootkits like you're done right that machine probably needs formatted it's very bad so is
there a way that we could do this before we put it into our computer with pip audit right
you can under some circumstances give it like a requirements file but I think a better way is to
just install stuff into a virtual environment so I did a follow-up thing here that says here's how
you create a docker instance that can copy whatever lock file you have into your temporary docker
container, install the requirements with uv, run pip audit on it, and then give you an answer back.
That way, even if it does find something, it finds them over there. Not in your computer,
but in an isolated Docker environment, which should be safe. So it talks to you that,
which is pretty cool. I'll give you a little Docker file that works nice and easy. You can
do whatever you want, create an alias so that it will run with nice reporting. You can skip things
you don't care about. Like this PDF library on Windows, if you give it a SVG file, image file,
it has a vulnerability. I'm like, well, one, I'm not running on Windows. I'm not giving it user
input. Like I don't care about like, I just, that's not a problem to me. Now, there's certain
things you might want to just ignore. And then finally, you can put, I'll show you how to use
like super good build time caching
to actually run as part of your Docker build pip audit
so that you can't even build a container
that has a vulnerability.
It will fail the Docker build if it has a problem,
according to pip audit,
for some definition of a problem.
So that whole series I wrote over winter break,
and I think it'll help people.
Super easy to adopt.
There's not much to it.
If you're using Docker, it's got good things for that.
If you're not, it also has things you can adopt.
I'm curious with the, yeah, on this topic,
like of dependencies and stuff and possible vulnerabilities.
I was trying to remember the name of the word,
but basically if you take some other project
and just copy its source into yours.
Vendoring.
Vendoring, that's it.
I'm just wondering if that's going to happen more
because more often for production projects
because you could have something automatically
or have an agent or something checked
to see if there's any updates in the project
and copy them in and test them.
Yeah, I think that's going to happen a lot,
especially for small libraries.
Like, oh, this one just adds color to your output.
You're like, hmm, do I really need it?
How often is that going to change?
Probably never.
Do I need to be subjected to a supply chain store?
or could I just copy it in?
Or with the agent encoding things,
you're like, I really just need these two functions.
Can I just ask it to write these functions?
And if they're working, I don't need a library at all.
I agree 100%.
I think so.
Okay.
I'm going to actually talk about main updates as well
in a different sense, I guess.
So I want to talk about typing extensions.
And again, this comes out of a suggestion from a listener.
It was going to be just an extra, but I started using it, and it's pretty cool.
So in December, we were talking about, or I was talking about at least, deprecation warnings and the topic of how do you deal with that of deprecated items.
And one recommendation was using the deprecated decorator.
So you could say warnings import from warnings import deprecated and decorate a deprecated function.
However, we were reminded that that's Python 3.13 only.
Somebody named Pryoinv on Mastodon notified us and said, hey, there's the typing extensions and they have them.
And so I was checking this out.
So the typing extensions, let's see, deprecated.
We could just say, get it from typing extensions.
And now we've got it on earlier versions of Python.
I haven't, like, I don't know if this is a, okay.
I'll save my comments, a couple of comments for the end.
But I'm pretty excited about this.
So I'm hoping that I can just use modern typing for different projects.
And why is this important?
It's important because me as a developer,
I can kind of remember how to do typing in one version of Python.
But if I'm trying to remember,
what typing decorators and all that stuff do I use for 3.12 versus 3.13 versus 3.14?
And that's hard to keep track.
So I'm excited to start using typing extensions.
And hopefully this cures the trying to keep track of it all.
There's a whole bunch of stuff in here.
It's got typing primitives, protocols, decorators, functions, enums, pure aliases, all sorts of stuff.
And it tells you when things were added and all that.
So anyway, kind of fun.
OK.
Yeah, that's very nice.
So hopefully I can get away with just using the deprecated wrapper, even in 3.12.
Because, I mean, come on.
Everybody's got a project that uses the newest, because it's my side project.
It's using the newest version.
Or I've got a library that I'm supporting that's supporting everything back to 3.12, maybe, or 3.8, or 3.9, or whatever.
And then a work project that's using 3.13, stuff like that.
Yeah, I got a message from somebody saying,
what am I open source little smaller libraries?
They can't get it to work.
They can't get it to install or something.
And I'm like, hmm, can't really see what the problem is.
Oh, you're using 3.9 and it's using some feature of 3.10
and it says it needs 3.10.
They're like, why doesn't this work?
I'm like, literally, it sounds new,
but that is no longer supported at all.
It's easy for these to sound like,
3.9 is not that old,
but it's out of even the bug fixes and security fixes.
Yeah, so people remember to do a min version
in your PyProject.toml
if you're doing a library that other people install
so that it just doesn't even update to that version.
Exactly.
That's what I did.
But there was not a fallbacks older version
they could use, right?
because it uses types that are not available,
like the lowercase d dict of string string
or something like that, right?
Oh, yeah.
Right.
Who wants to go back to importing uppercase dict?
I don't want to do that.
Exactly.
I will do it when he needs support.
But if it's literally out of support, I'm sorry.
This is not on me to make my library work on as far back
as history goes.
All right.
Let's talk about my spy story.
Okay.
So this is a real short one.
My first one was really long.
This one's really short.
New MI6 chief Blaise Metroeli outlined her vision for a technologically –
technology?
Augmented intelligence gathering in her first public speech on December 15th,
warning that the U.K. operates in a space between peace and war.
I mean, MI6, come on, James Bond, pretty cool.
At the Tameside headquarters, she said previously the UK –
she was previously in charge of Q, which is kind of cool.
Anyway, said the headline is,
we will need our MI6 spies agents to be as fluent in Python as they are in Russian.
That's kind of interesting, right?
Yeah.
Look, we live in this super technological world,
and so much of this is becoming cyber more and more.
One of the main bits is, while mentioning China,
Miraweli focused mainly on the threats from Russia.
She said the country is, Russia is,
testing us in the gray zone with tactics
that are just below the threshold of war.
Pretty much cyber attacks, critical infrastructure,
drones, propaganda, all the stuff
that having some kind of programming skill will super help.
So anyway, I just thought this was an interesting headline
and worth a little shout out.
Also, I didn't know Q was real.
I didn't either.
I was like, oh, this is so cool.
I knew MI6 was a real thing, but Q, that's awesome.
I know.
It's definitely cool.
Cool.
All right.
Anyway, everyone needs to know Python these days.
Jake VanderPless in 2017, the PyCon keynote said,
Python is a, oh gosh, what term?
Basically like a quilt of all these different uses,
use cases of people doing interesting things.
Well, here's one more patch in the quilt.
Yeah, even if you got a cooler language,
we'll just incorporate it into Python.
We are the Borg.
Exactly.
There's something to that.
All right.
What are you going to lean into next here?
So we're into extras now.
So I said that I was going to take some time off from writing in December,
and I had a wonderful break with my family.
And now I'm back to writing again.
I wanted to announce that the next chapter is going to be finding waste in test-driven development.
And I don't know why I was stressed out about it.
But yesterday I just sat down and wrote, I think, a first draft.
I need to clean it up a little bit, but I want to get this released today.
So hopefully by the time you listen to this, if you're not watching it live, it'll be around.
And I'll, yeah, so the next one will be there.
I've still got a goal of finishing this, at least the first draft, by the end of January.
It's a tight deadline.
I only have half the chapters written so far, but I think that we can get there.
I think the later chapters are possibly shorter.
And I'm going to try to release it as an audiobook too,
so I can't make them too long or else they'll kill me.
Okay, so that's going on.
One of the things keeping me updated and on track, hopefully,
is watches.
So slight change of topic,
but I am back to sporting a non-smart watch.
I'm doing what I've got a right now I'm wearing a Victorinox watch and I picked it up at an estate sale for 40 bucks and it was a steal.
It was great.
Great watch.
But and then since I'm now looking for watches, my I picked up a couple more estate sales in the last last week, too.
So that's fun.
Something getting in the way of writing, though, is a Christmas present I got for my family.
So they got me a Steam Deck, and I'm having a blast with it.
I like not having a console.
I like just sitting on the couch or sitting back in a chair and playing video games.
I'm having fun with that again.
So I'd loved, and I've been looking through the store and everything.
I'd love to have anybody let me know.
So let me know on Bluesky or Mastodon
if there's a particular game I should check out.
I haven't been into the gaming scene since the early 90s.
I've got some good recommendations for you.
I don't know for sure that they'll run on the Steam Deck,
but they do run on Windows Steam in OniForce Now.
Small lands, S-M-A-L-L-A-N-D-S.
Small lands, you're like a little tiny creature
running around this forest exploring it,
and ladybugs come by, and they're like hip height.
It's a really cool experience.
The graphics is incredible.
The music is peaceful.
Cool.
Give that one a go.
All right.
Thanks.
But anyway, reach out on Master of Bluesky.
Let me know what you were playing.
Michael, do you have any extras?
I do.
I got actually two follow-ups now that you've mentioned these things.
They were not originally there,
but I've been dreaming of the Steam Machine,
which is like a six inch by six inch cube
that is kind of like a local,
you put it by your TV or something.
I'm not sure if it makes sense for me to get it,
but it looks like a really neat machine.
I've been thinking about that.
That just got announced.
That's cool.
But back to watches,
I used to have a Pebble Round 2,
which is a really cool little round watch
that had a traditional watch look,
but it was a smartwatch.
This predates Apple Watch, I think.
And it was so good.
I loved it so much.
It was incredibly thin.
The e-ink display just looked like a real watch face.
And I had so many people come up to me and say,
wow, that is a cool watch.
What kind of watch is that?
And these would be like older people
or people that were not techie,
and they didn't realize even that it was a smartwatch.
They were just, man, that's cool.
And I'm like, actually, that's a smartwatch.
They're like, what is it?
Oh, my gosh.
Incredible.
Why am I saying this?
It's coming back.
They're remaking it.
Pebble's coming back and is open source.
And so if you're a fan of Pebble,
there's a couple of Pebble things coming back.
So yay for watches.
Although I'm still sticking with my Apple Watch
because I love all the health analytics
it gathers about me.
All right, here's my actual extras.
Better not follow up, impromptu follow-ups.
So Ruben Lerner just posted a 12 video series
on what's coming up in Pandas 3.
so getting ready for pandas 3 short focused video series so like I said 12
videos come check it out if you're looking forward to what's coming up in
pandas and I just released as in two hours ago a really awesome talk Python
episode called web frameworks in production by their creators so I have
folks from the Django team folks from the Litestar team from flask and court
and FastAPI all of the people who create all of those coming on to talk
about how you should run their web framework in production.
I thought that was just super, super fun, cool conversation.
Oh, wow.
Looking forward to watching that.
Yeah.
Somebody in the audience said that I basically put the Python Avengers team together when
it comes to web frameworks.
It was really incredible.
Quite the crew there.
Okay.
That's it for my extras.
How are you feeling about a joke?
Oh, a joke would be great.
This one has to have the stage set just a little bit, okay?
Okay.
By telling another joke.
So there's this funny joke meme that went around like 15 years ago.
There's JavaScript, the definitive guide,
which is like this 600-page tome of a huge book.
And then Douglas Crawford published a follow-up book
called JavaScript, the Good Parts.
And it's like 100 pages.
I don't know how big it is, but it's much, much smaller.
then the definitive guide,
like this is the slice that you should only pay attention to
and the rest is wrong.
Isn't this funny?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, I remember that.
Yeah, yeah, it's kind of old.
But here's the new joke.
Error handling.
It's this huge, huge book.
And then there's a little tiny one, error handling before AI.
It's just like how much you got to deal with and keep track of it.
Like what is all this stuff going on?
Why is this all here?
It's the opposite.
It's the inverse of going from a huge thing to like a focused good one.
It's like, oh, we had this focused little bit of error handling.
Now we got this mega thing we got to deal with.
Yeah.
There's a joke.
I'm looking forward to people.
People are already starting to actually care about making their tests readable
because they're having to figure out what's wrong.
Yeah.
So.
Me too.
Well, happy 2026 to everybody.
Brian, good to see you.
Nice.
Looking forward to another year of good stuff.
Yeah, we should have little poppers.
Yeah, those things.
Shoot out the little confetti or whatever.
But no, we're just going to say goodbye.
Goodbye.
Talk to you next week.
See you later.